---
layout: blog
title: "Two-Factor Authentication (2FA): What It Is and How It Works"
description: Two-factor authentication, or 2FA, refers to a unique type of digital security. As mentioned above, it involves a combination of two different methods. Typically, this includes the password method and a
createdAt: 2024-03-12T00:23:00.000Z
updatedAt: 2024-03-12T00:23:00.000Z
tag: terms
image: https://ik.imagekit.io/monierate/uploads/two-factor-microsoft.jpg
published: true
---
Feature phones introduced many of us to digital security through the simple but reliable PIN method. When you purchase one of these phones, you will be promptly required to set a four-digit code. This four-digit code is known as a PIN. It allows for unlocking the device, to gain access to general functions such as calls and text messaging. 

In addition to the unlock PIN, certain special features like using a new sim card can only be accessed after you set up a new PIN and input it correctly on the device. PIN security works great, but it is simple enough to be hacked. Besides, people easily have their PINs stolen by anyone keenly observing their hand movements. 

A better solution to this came in the form of passwords. Passwords are much more reliable than PINs because they consist of alphabets, numbers, and special characters all bunched up in a long string. And what is even more reliable than that is two-factor authentication. This involves both PIN and password methods. 

Interested in finding out the specifics about two-factor authentication? Go ahead and read through this article. 


## What Is Two-Factor Authentication (2FA)?

Two-factor authentication, or 2FA, refers to a unique type of digital security. As mentioned above, it involves a combination of two different methods. Typically, this includes the password method and a special PIN called [OTP](https://monierate.com/blog/otp-what-it-is-and-how-it-works). Some 2FA processes make use of biometric data instead of an OTP. 

Like every other form of digital security, 2FA is designed to serve two purposes. One, it helps verify the identity of a user and two, it serves as an authorization for online activities or internet transactions.

The reliability of this method makes it highly recommended in high-risk online processes. And why it is so reliable is because the OTP code used as a PIN is always generated by a third-party application. Users can download the 2FA app on their device or use it securely from a separate device - all without compromising their security. 


## Different Two-Factor Authentication Methods

If you’re big on online security, then this will blow your mind. Remember we said that the two-factor authentication combined a personal password and a system-generated PIN or OTP? Well, that is simply is the basics.

There are more than four different methods of deploying 2FA on any system. Here are the different ways:

**SMS Notification:** A code is sent in an SMS message to the user’s registered phone number. The user will either interact with this text (for example, by sending a reply SMS) or extract the code and use it where appropriate. 

**Push Notification:** This is an automated process, unlike any other 2FA method. How it works is that the 2FA system sends a signal to the user’s device. This signal instructs the website or app to either grant or deny access to the device and by extension, the user of such device. 

**Hardware Tokens:** Hardware tokens are hand-held devices that generate the OTP or password. In this case, such a token must provide the codes needed to complete a 2FA process. The hardware token is typically issued by a company or institution, to a user who is bound to make use of its 2FA implemented website or application. 

**Voice-based Authentication:**  Voice-based authentication is one of many biometric authentication options. It involves a process where an automated voice asks the user to take an action. This could be to say out their name, click a particular key on their device, or type a code which is read out aloud. Once the user performs the actions as instructed, the 2FA process becomes complete. 


## Benefits of 2FA or Two-Factor Authentication

There are strikingly remarkable benefits to using 2FA or two-factor authentication. 

- **The Use of Password Generators**: 2FA applications feature PIN or password generators. The generator produces a random code (numbers, alphabets, or a combination of these). Since the codes are random and do not follow any particular pattern, it is difficult for hackers to predict them. 

* **Password Entry Count**: The 2FA process counts the number of attempts made during password entry. Inputting the wrong password a couple of times will, therefore, trigger an account lock. This tends to keep hackers away since they do not have multiple tries when attempting to hijack a user’s account. Unfortunately, actual users may also be locked out and have a tough time regaining access to their accounts. 

- **Use of Multiple Security Methods**: Ever heard the saying, “There is strength in numbers?” Well, this plays out literally with the 2FA method. The use of both the user’s password and a system-generated password makes this method more reliable compared to a password-only or a PIN-only method. 


## How To Enable and Disable 2FA 

2FA can be enabled on any website or application where the feature is available. This action is taken in the settings section of such platforms. Here are details on enabling two-factor authentication on a website or application that supports this type of security. 

- Navigate to the “Settings” page

- Scroll down and click on the “Security” tab 

- Look for “2FA” or “Two-factor Authentication”. Click on it.

- Determine which 2FA method you will prefer. Here, it is recommended that you pick an option that is suitable for you. This could be based on your understanding of the option or the process involved with it.  

- Once you’re certain about your choice, go ahead to click it from the list of options available. 

- Follow the exact instructions displayed on the screen to initiate the 2FA process. Remember that you may be required to download a 2FA application if it is the sole option available for this process. 

Disabling 2FA involves almost the same steps as above. You will have to navigate through the general “Settings” page into the “Security” page and then make your way to the 2FA setting. Once there, you will find detailed instructions on how to deactivate the 2FA setup. 

Alternatively, you can move from one type of 2FA to another type, rather than turning it all off. For instance, you may decide to switch from biometric authentication to the much simpler SMS authentication. One is less secure than the other - no doubt - but this is still much better than disabling the 2FA option.  


## Some 2FA Apps and Tokens

#### 2FA

Shocking, but 2FAS is the name of a two-factor authentication app. A [review](https://www.androidauthority.com/best-two-factor-authenticator-apps-904743/) of this app outlines that it supports iOS and Android devices and can be used as a plugin in web browsers. Other striking features include support for PIN and biometric data, and End-to-End encryption during sync and backup processes. 

#### Google Authenticator

Google Authenticator is another popular 2FA app out there. However, the review source referenced above states that this app does not perform sync and backups. The good part is that the app is available for both Android and iOS users.  

#### TOTP Authenticator

TOTP Authenticator reportedly includes support for iOS, Android, and Chrome. The app has both sync and backup features but users only get End-to-End encryption during backups. 

#### YubiKey

YubiKey falls under the hardware token 2FA authenticator category. In today’s world, it is old but gold. The token is a small device that resembles a portable flash drive. On one end of this device is a Type-A USB “male” port that connects to the user’s phone and on the top side is a small circular button. 

Users simply insert the Yubikey into their device and click on the soft button. This gets the device working, immediately completing the 2FA process. 

## Difference between 2FA and MFA 

MFA stands for Multi-factor authentication. This was birthed from 2FA. The only difference between both types of security is that the 2FA features two different methods of authentication. Alternatively, the MFA features three or more methods of authentication. 

Both of these 2FA types are reliable and can be used for any business or online operation. However, it is very common to see government and other high-security institutions make use of the MFA.  


## Conclusion
Let’s be honest; 2FA processes are longer and inconvenient compared to password-only or pin-only security. But wouldn’t you trade convenience for more protection of your online account or data? We’re sure you will, especially given that is the smart choice to make.
